LLM Observability docs (#22668)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/llm_observability/sdk.md

---

> title: LLM Observability SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: LLM Observability SDK for Python
```

---

<div class="alert alert-info">LLM Observability is in public beta.</a></div>

> ## Installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview

The LLM Observability SDK for Python enhances the observability of your Python-based LLM applications. 

You can install and configure tracing of various operations such as workflows, tasks, and API calls with simple context managers or function decorators. You can also annotate these traces with metadata for deeper insights into the performance and behavior of your applications, supporting multiple LLM services or models from the same environment.

## Setup
```

Install the latest `ddtrace` package hash:

{{< code-block lang="shell">}}
pip install git+https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-py.git@main
{{< /code-block >}}

## Running an LLM application

Your application startup command must specify the required environment variables:

{{< code-block lang="shell">}}

> DD_SITE=<DATADOG_SITE> DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_API_KEY> DD_LLMOBS_ENABLED=1 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DD_SITE={{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}} DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_API_KEY> DD_LLMOBS_ENABLED=1 \
```

DD_LLMOBS_APP_NAME=<YOUR_APP_NAME> ddtrace-run <YOUR_APP_STARTUP_COMMAND>
{{< /code-block >}}

The full list of supported environment variables is below.

`DD_API_KEY`
: required - _string_
<br />Your Datadog API key.

`DD_SITE`
: required - _string_ 

> <br />The Datadog site to submit your LLM data. Should be `datadoghq.com` or `us3.datadoghq.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br />The Datadog site to submit your LLM data. Your site is {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
```

`DD_LLMOBS_APP_NAME`
: required - _string_ 
<br />The name of your LLM application, service, or project, under which all traces and spans are grouped. This helps distinguish between different applications or experiments. To override this value for a given root span, see [Tracing multiple applications](#tracing-multiple-applications).

`DD_LLMOBS_NO_APM`
: optional - _integer or string_ - **default**: `false`
<br />Only required if you are not a Datadog APM customer, in which case this should be set to `1` or `true`.

`DD_INSTRUMENTATION_TELEMETRY_ENABLED`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `true`
<br />If you are not a Datadog APM customer, set to `0` or `false`.

`DD_REMOTE_CONFIGURATION_ENABLED`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `true`
<br />If you are not a Datadog APM customer, set to `0` or `false`.

`DD_OPENAI_METRICS_ENABLED`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `true`
<br />If you are not a Datadog APM customer, set to `0` or `false`.

`DD_LANGCHAIN_METRICS_ENABLED`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `true`
<br />If you are not a Datadog APM customer, set to `0` or `false`.

## Tracing spans

> To trace a span, use `LLMObs.<SPAN_KIND>()` as a context manager (for example, `LLMObs.task()` for a task span). Learn more about the available span kinds in [the span documentation][8].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To trace a span, use `LLMObs.<SPAN_KIND>()` as a context manager (for example, `LLMObs.task()` for a task span). For a list of available span kinds, see the [Span Kinds documentation][8].
```

<br/>The name of the operation.

#### Example

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs import LLMObs

def perform_embedding():
    with LLMObs.embedding(name="openai_embedding") as embedding_span:
        ... # user application logic
    return 
{{< /code-block >}}

### Retrieval span

To trace a retrieval span, use `LLMObs.retrieval()` as a context manager.

#### Arguments

`name`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `"retrieval"`
<br/>The name of the operation.

#### Example

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs import LLMObs

def similarity_search():
    with LLMObs.retrieval(name="get_relevant_docs") as retrieval_span:
        ... # user application logic
    return 
{{< /code-block >}}

### Task span

To trace a task span, use `LLMObs.task()` as a context manager.

#### Arguments

`name`
: optional - _string_ - **default**: `"task"`
<br/>The name of the operation.

#### Example

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs import LLMObs

def sanitize_input():
    with LLMObs.task(name="sanitize_input") as task_span:
        ... # user application logic
    return 
{{< /code-block >}}

## Tracing spans using function decorators

> For each span kind, the LLM Observability Python SDK `ddtrace.llmobs.decorators` module provides a corresponding function decorator to automatically trace the operation a given function entails. These function decorators can be used the same way as their inline counterparts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each span kind, the LLM Observability SDK for Python `ddtrace.llmobs.decorators` module provides a corresponding function decorator to automatically trace the operation a given function entails. These function decorators can be used the same way as their inline counterparts.
```

### Example

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs.decorators import workflow

@workflow(name="process_message", session_id="<SESSION_ID>", ml_app="<ML_APP>")
def process_message():
    ... # user application logic
    return
{{< /code-block >}}

## Annotating a span

> The LLM Observability Python SDK provides the method `LLMObs.annotate()` to annotate spans with inputs, outputs, and metadata. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LLM Observability SDK for Python provides the method `LLMObs.annotate()` to annotate spans with inputs, outputs, and metadata. 
```

### Arguments

The `LLMObs.annotate()` method accepts the following arguments:

`span` 
: optional - _Span_ - **default**: the current active span
<br />The span to annotate. If `span` is not provided (as when using function decorators), the SDK annotates the current active span.

`input_data` 
: optional - _JSON serializable type or list of dictionaries_ 
<br />Either a JSON serializable type (for non-LLM spans) or a list of dictionaries with this format: `{"role": "...", "content": "..."}` (for LLM spans).

`output_data` 
: optional - _JSON serializable type or list of dictionaries_ 
<br />Either a JSON serializable type (for non-LLM spans) or a list of dictionaries with this format: `{"role": "...", "content": "..."}` (for LLM spans). **Note**: Retrieval spans are a special case and require a list of dictionaries with this format: `{"text": "...", "name": "...", "score": float, "id": "..."}`.

`metadata` 
: optional - _dictionary_

> <br />A dictionary of JSON serializable key-value pairs that users can add as metadata information relevant to the input/output operation described by the span (`model_temperature`, `max_tokens`, `top_k`, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br />A dictionary of JSON serializable key-value pairs that users can add as metadata information relevant to the input or output operation described by the span (`model_temperature`, `max_tokens`, `top_k`, and so on).
```

1. Start a span manually using the same methods (for example, the `LLMObs.workflow` method for a workflow span), but inline rather than as a context manager. 
2. Pass the span object as an argument to other functions.
3. Stop the span manually with the `span.finish()` method.

### Example

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs import LLMObs

def separate_task(workflow_span):
    ... # user application logic 
    workflow_span.finish()
    return

def process_message():
workflow_span = LLMObs.workflow(name="process_message")
    ... # user application logic
    separate_task(workflow_span)
    return
{{< /code-block >}}

## Tracking user sessions

Session tracking allows you to associate multiple interactions with a given user. When starting a root span for a new trace or span in a new process, specify the `session_id` argument with the string ID of the underlying user session:

{{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace.llmobs import LLMObs

def process_message():
    with LLMObs.workflow(name="process_message", session_id="<SESSION_ID>") as workflow_span:
        ... # user application logic
    return 
{{< /code-block >}}

## Tracing multiple applications

> The SDK supports tracking multiple LLM applications from the same service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LLM Observability SDK for Python supports tracking multiple LLM applications from the same service.
```
